Matthew 12:19
“For they will not strive, nor cry, nor shall any one hear their voice.”

Luke 10:19
“Behold I have given to you power to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy.”

Luke 10:20
“Rejoice not that the demons are subject to you, but that your names are written in the heavens.”

Matthew 7:22
“Wherefore to those who boasted in signs but not in virtue, and said “Lord, in Your name did we not cast out demons, and in Your name did many mighty works? Verily I say unto you, I know you not” Matthew 7:22 for the Lord knows not the ways of the wicked.” “But we ought always to pray, as I said above, that we may receive the gift of discerning spirits; that, as it is written 1 John 4:1, we may not believe every spirit.”

John 8:44
“From the beginning the devil is a manslayer and a father of vice.”

1 Corinthians 15:10
Apostle Paul writes “not I, but the grace of God which was with me.”

1 Corinthians 15:31
Apostle Paul writes “I die daily. For if we too live as though dying daily, we shall not sin.”

2 Corinthians 2:11
Apostle Paul writes “For we are not ignorant of his devices”, being that “the changes in their plots are many” - St Athanasius 

Psalm 118:7
David sang “the Lord is my helper and I will despise my enemies.”

Psalm 118:7
David sang “for the Lord is my helper, and I shall look down on mine enemies”

Ephesians 6:11
Apostle Paul writes "Put on the full armor of God, so that you can take your stand against the devil's schemes."

Ephesians 6:12
Apostle Paul writes” Not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places.”

2 Corinthians 12:10
Apostle Paul writes "That is why, for Christ’s sake, I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, in difficulties. For when I am weak, then I am strong."

Philippians 3:14
Apostle Paul writes “Forgetting the things which are behind and stretching forward to the things which are before.”

1 Kings 18:15
Prophet Elias spake “The Lord lives before whose presence I stand today.”

Romans 8:18
Apostle Paul writes "For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us."

Romans 8:35
Apostle Paul writes "Nothing shall separate me from the love of Christ. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall trouble or hardship or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword?"

2 Thessalonians
Apostle Paul writes “He who is idle let him not eat.”
